api/README.md, before:

# Luminary API

API for Luminary, built with [Nest](https://github.com/nestjs/nest) and [CouchDB](https://couchdb.apache.org/).

## Prerequisites

The following software is needed to run and/or test the Luminary API:

-   CouchDB (document database) - see https://couchdb.apache.org
-   S3 (compatible) storage, e.g. MinIO - see https://min.io

### CouchDB installation

For development purposes, CouchDB can be installed as a docker:

```shell
docker run -p 5984:5984 -d -e COUCHDB_USER=admin -e COUCHDB_PASSWORD=yourpassword couchdb
```

After successfully running CouchDB, create a local database via the CouchDB web interface at http://localhost:5984/\_utils/ using the credentials you set above.

### S3 storage (MinIO)

For development purposes, MinIO can be installed as a docker for S3 compatible storage:

This command will create an instance with a pre-configured access key / secret combination:

```shell
docker run -d \
   -p 9000:9000 \
   -p 9001:9001 \
   --name luminary-storage \
   -e "MINIO_ACCESS_KEY=minio" \
   -e "MINIO_SECRET_KEY=minio123" \
   quay.io/minio/minio server /data --console-address ":9001"
```

If you need to log into the MinIO web console, the root user and password can be passed instead. Note that you manually will have to create an access key / secret combination and update your .env file accordingly. The web console is available on http://localhost:9001

```shell
docker run -d \
   -p 9000:9000 \
   -p 9001:9001 \
   --name luminary-storage \
   -e "MINIO_ROOT_USER=rootuser" \
   -e "MINIO_ROOT_PASSWORD=password" \
   quay.io/minio/minio server /data --console-address ":9001"
```

## Installation

1. Copy the environment variable file and fill in required fields, such as the database connection string:

```sh
cp .env.example .env
```

2. Install dependencies:

```sh
$ npm ci
```

## Running the app

3. Seeding the database:

Before running Luminary against a clean CouchDB database it is recommended to seed the database with the default document set. This document set is also used for unit tests, and should help you to get a functional setup to start with.

```sh
$ npm run seed
```

By default the app will run at http://localhost:3000.

4. Run the server:

```sh
# development
$ npm run start

# watch mode
$ npm run start:dev # or just 'dev'

# production mode
$ npm run build
$ npm run start:prod
```

## Test

Copy and `.env.test.example` file to `.env.test` and set the required values, such as the database connection string.

```sh
cp .env.test.example .env.test
```

Run the unit tests:

```sh
# unit tests
$ npm run test:unit

# test coverage
$ npm run test:cov
```

## Lint

```sh
# lint code and output errors
$ npm run lint

# lint code and fix auto-fixable errors
$ npm run lint:fix
```

## Logging

In production mode (`npm run start:prod`) the API logs are stored in a tailable api.log file. The log files are rotated when the size exceeds 1MB and only the latest 5 files are being kept. In development mode logs are printed to the console.

Commit message:

Refactor database queries and indexing and add new sync mechanism (#1136)

api/README.md, after:

# Luminary API

API for Luminary, built with [Nest](https://github.com/nestjs/nest) and [CouchDB](https://couchdb.apache.org/).

## Prerequisites

The following software is needed to run and/or test the Luminary API:

-   CouchDB (document database) - see https://couchdb.apache.org
-   S3 (compatible) storage, e.g. MinIO - see https://min.io

### CouchDB installation

For development purposes, CouchDB can be installed as a docker:

```shell
docker run -p 5984:5984 -d -e COUCHDB_USER=admin -e COUCHDB_PASSWORD=yourpassword couchdb
```

After successfully running CouchDB, create a local database via the CouchDB web interface at http://localhost:5984/\_utils/ using the credentials you set above.

### S3 storage (MinIO)

For development purposes, MinIO can be installed as a docker for S3 compatible storage:

This command will create an instance with a pre-configured access key / secret combination:

```shell
docker run -d \
   -p 9000:9000 \
   -p 9001:9001 \
   --name luminary-storage \
   -e "MINIO_ACCESS_KEY=minio" \
   -e "MINIO_SECRET_KEY=minio123" \
   quay.io/minio/minio server /data --console-address ":9001"
```

If you need to log into the MinIO web console, the root user and password can be passed instead. Note that you manually will have to create an access key / secret combination and update your .env file accordingly. The web console is available on http://localhost:9001

```shell
docker run -d \
   -p 9000:9000 \
   -p 9001:9001 \
   --name luminary-storage \
   -e "MINIO_ROOT_USER=rootuser" \
   -e "MINIO_ROOT_PASSWORD=password" \
   quay.io/minio/minio server /data --console-address ":9001"
```

## Installation

1. Copy the environment variable file and fill in required fields, such as the database connection string:

```sh
cp .env.example .env
```

2. Install dependencies:

```sh
$ npm ci
```

## Running the API

3. Seeding the database:

Before running Luminary against a clean CouchDB database it is recommended to seed the database with the default document set. This document set is also used for unit tests, and should help you to get a functional setup to start with.

```sh
$ npm run seed
```

By default the API will run at http://localhost:3000.

4. Run the server:

```sh
# development
$ npm run start

# watch mode
$ npm run start:dev # or just 'dev'

# production mode
$ npm run build
$ npm run start:prod
```

## Test

Copy and `.env.test.example` file to `.env.test` and set the required values, such as the database connection string.

```sh
cp .env.test.example .env.test
```

Run the unit tests:

```sh
# unit tests
$ npm run test:unit

# test coverage
$ npm run test:cov
```

## Lint

```sh
# lint code and output errors
$ npm run lint

# lint code and fix auto-fixable errors
$ npm run lint:fix
```

## Logging

In production mode (`npm run start:prod`) the API logs are stored in a tailable api.log file. The log files are rotated when the size exceeds 1MB and only the latest 5 files are being kept. In development mode logs are printed to the console.

## Load testing

The load tester currently tests the API for Luminary Client app sync loads on the /query API endpoint.

```sh
# load tester help
$ npx ts-node load_tester --help
```
